Arculus Recovery v1.5.0 ? Recovery Procedures
===============================================

Scope
-----

This document defines the step-by-step procedures for recovering a BIP39 wallet
using Arculus Recovery v1.5.0. It covers every supported recovery entry point:
direct mnemonic entry, import from a .arc encrypted seed file, and CLI-based
recovery. For each entry point it defines the inputs required, the verification
steps that must be completed before any output is acted on, the decision tree for
locating addresses when the originating wallet configuration is unknown, and the
procedure for sweeping funds after a hardware wallet failure.

This document describes what to do and in what order. It does not re-derive the
cryptographic constructions underlying the derivation pipeline; those are defined
in Derivation.txt. It does not re-specify the .arc file format or encryption
scheme; those are defined in Encryption.txt and FileFormat.txt. It does not
re-enumerate the threat model or operational security requirements; those are
defined in OpSec.txt. All of those constraints apply during every recovery
session described here. This document assumes they are satisfied.

The procedures below are written for a user who has already prepared an airgapped
machine and a live ephemeral operating system as specified in OpSec.txt. Do not
begin any recovery procedure on a machine that does not meet the airgap and
ephemeral OS requirements in that document.


Prerequisites Checklist
------------------------

Before beginning any recovery session, confirm the following conditions are met.
A session that proceeds without satisfying these conditions may produce output
that is cryptographically correct but operationally unusable, or may expose seed
material to a compromised environment.

  [ ] The machine has no active network route. Physical cables are disconnected.
      Wireless and Bluetooth interfaces are disabled at the hardware level.
      The network status indicator in the tool title bar shows red (no route).
      The indicator is a convenience check; physical confirmation is authoritative.

  [ ] The operating system is live-booted and ephemeral. It writes nothing to
      persistent disk. Hibernation is disabled. Swap is RAM-backed or disabled.

  [ ] The Arculus Recovery file has been verified by SHA256 hash before use.
      Expected hashes are published in the README. An unverified file must not
      be used for any recovery session involving real key material.

  [ ] You have identified all inputs required for this recovery: the mnemonic
      or .arc file, the BIP39 passphrase if applicable, the originating wallet
      software and derivation path if known, and the target coin.

  [ ] You are in a private space with no cameras pointed at the screen and no
      other persons with line of sight to the display.


Inputs Required for a Complete Recovery
-----------------------------------------

A deterministic BIP39 wallet requires at most four inputs to fully recover:

  Input 1 ? Mnemonic (required):
    The 12-word or 24-word BIP39 seed phrase. Every wallet address and private
    key derives deterministically from this value. If the mnemonic is lost and
    no .arc backup exists, the wallet is unrecoverable. The mnemonic must be
    entered exactly as originally generated, with correct spelling and word order.
    Partial mnemonics, mnemonics with transposed words, or mnemonics with one or
    more words replaced produce a completely different key tree with no error or
    warning other than BIP39 checksum failure, if the checksum happens to fail.
    A mnemonic with a transposition error that passes the BIP39 checksum is
    indistinguishable from a valid but wrong mnemonic.

  Input 2 ? BIP39 passphrase (required if used, otherwise omit):
    An optional additional string that was entered at wallet setup time. It is
    separate from the .arc encryption password. If a passphrase was used and
    is omitted or entered incorrectly, the derived key tree is cryptographically
    unrelated to the one that holds funds. The tool produces no error; it derives
    valid-looking but wrong addresses and keys. There is no mechanism to detect
    a wrong passphrase other than comparing derived addresses against known on-
    chain history or against a previously recorded root fingerprint. If you are
    uncertain whether a passphrase was used, refer to the passphrase decision
    procedure in the Address Location section below.

  Input 3 ? Derivation path (required if non-standard):
    The BIP32 account path that the originating wallet used to derive addresses.
    If the originating wallet was an Arculus hardware wallet using the native
    default, the path is m/0'. If the originating wallet used a standard BIP44/
    49/84/86 path, the path follows the conventions in the derivation path table
    below. If the originating wallet software is unknown, the path must be
    determined by trial; the address location procedure in this document covers
    this case.

  Input 4 ? Script type (required for UTXO coins if non-standard):
    For Bitcoin, Litecoin, and Dogecoin, the script type determines the address
    format and the encoding of derived addresses. If the script type is known
    from the originating wallet, select it directly. If unknown, use the Auto
    selector and try each standard path in turn. For Ethereum and XRP, the
    script type is fixed and not selectable.

All four inputs must be correct simultaneously for the derived output to match
the addresses and keys associated with on-chain history. Errors in any single
input produce silently wrong output. Verification against a known address or
root fingerprint is mandatory before acting on any derived output.


Standard Derivation Path Reference
------------------------------------

This table is the first lookup reference when the originating wallet software
is known. Identify the row that matches the originating wallet, coin, and address
format, and enter the path and script type exactly as shown.

  Coin      Script type    Path              Address prefix  Notes
  --------- -------------- ----------------- --------------- ----------------------
  Bitcoin   P2PKH          m/44'/0'/0'       1...            Legacy BIP44
  Bitcoin   P2WPKH-P2SH    m/49'/0'/0'       3...            Wrapped SegWit
  Bitcoin   P2WPKH         m/84'/0'/0'       bc1q...         Native SegWit
  Bitcoin   P2TR           m/86'/0'/0'       bc1p...         Taproot, BIP86
  Bitcoin   P2WPKH         m/0'              bc1q...         Arculus native default
  Litecoin  P2PKH          m/44'/2'/0'       L...            Legacy BIP44
  Litecoin  P2WPKH-P2SH    m/49'/2'/0'       M...            Wrapped SegWit
  Litecoin  P2WPKH         m/84'/2'/0'       ltc1q...        Native SegWit (tool default)
  Litecoin  P2TR           m/86'/2'/0'       ltc1p...        Taproot-style output
  Dogecoin  P2PKH          m/44'/3'/0'       D...            Default Dogecoin path
  Dogecoin  P2WPKH-P2SH    m/49'/3'/0'       9... or A...    Supported; wallet support varies
  Dogecoin  P2WPKH         m/84'/3'/0'       doge1q...       Supported; wallet support varies
  Ethereum  Account        m/44'/60'/0'      0x...           ERC-20 tokens same address
  XRP       Account        m/44'/144'/0'     r...            Destination tags not derived

For the Arculus hardware wallet native path (m/0'), the tool displays an info
tooltip beside the Derivation Path field as a reminder that this path differs
from BIP44 convention. The tooltip is informational only and does not affect
derivation behavior.

If the originating wallet used a non-account-0 path (e.g. m/84'/0'/1' for a
second account), change the trailing account index from 0 to the correct value.
Account indices above 0 are uncommon but legal. Most wallet software creates
only account 0 unless the user explicitly created additional accounts.


Procedure 1 ? Recovery from Direct Mnemonic Entry (HTML)
----------------------------------------------------------

Use this procedure when the mnemonic is available as a written or memorized
phrase and no .arc file is involved.

  1. Open Arculus_Recovery.html in the browser on the airgapped machine.
     Confirm the network status indicator shows red before proceeding.
     The same HTML workflow is used by the PySide6 GUI because it renders the
     packaged HTML application inside Qt WebEngine.

  2. Select the word count radio button (12 or 24) that matches the mnemonic.

  3. Enter each mnemonic word into its numbered word field. Each field provides
     inline validation against the BIP39 word list; a word that is not in the
     list is flagged immediately. Correct any flagged words before proceeding.
     Note: a word that is in the word list but wrong for the position passes
     inline validation silently. Inline validation confirms only that each word
     exists in the BIP39 word list, not that the complete mnemonic is the
     correct one.

  4. After all words are entered, the tool performs full BIP39 validation
     including checksum verification. If the checksum fails, the tool displays
     a checksum error. A checksum failure means at least one word is incorrect,
     or the word order is wrong, or both. Correct the mnemonic until the
     checksum passes.
     Note: some transcription errors produce a different valid mnemonic that
     passes the BIP39 checksum. Checksum verification is a necessary but not
     sufficient condition for mnemonic correctness.

  5. If a BIP39 passphrase was used, enter it in the Passphrase field. If no
     passphrase was used, leave the field empty. Do not guess. If you are
     uncertain, proceed with the empty passphrase first and compare derived
     addresses against known on-chain history. See the Address Location
     Procedure section if the originating configuration is unknown.

  6. Select the target coin from the Coin selector.

  7. Select the script type. If the originating wallet software is known,
     select the script type from the reference table above. If unknown, select
     Auto and proceed to the Address Location Procedure section.

  8. Enter the derivation path. If the originating wallet is known, enter the
     path from the reference table. If the tool default is already correct
     (m/0' for Arculus native, or the coin-appropriate standard path), no
     change is required.

  9. Set the Address Count to the number of addresses to derive. The default
     of 5 covers most cases. If the target address is beyond index 4, increase
     the count or use the Range input to target a specific index window.

  10. Click Derive Keys + Addresses. Wait for the derivation progress bar to
      complete. The output panel populates with derived addresses and keys.

  11. Verify the root fingerprint displayed in the toolbar against a previously
      recorded root fingerprint. If the fingerprints match, the mnemonic and
      passphrase are correct. If they do not match, and you have a recorded
      fingerprint from a prior session, the inputs are wrong; do not act on
      the output.

  12. Locate the target address in the output table. Confirm it appears in the
      on-chain history of the blockchain explorer (performed offline by
      comparison against a previously exported address list, or after the
      session on a trusted device). Do not connect the airgapped machine to any
      network at this step.

  13. Export the output in the required format using the Export selector.
      Transfer the file to a USB drive for handling on a separate trusted
      machine. The export file contains private key material and must be handled
      per the Category B requirements in OpSec.txt.
      If using the Tauri desktop wrapper, verify the specific packaged build's
      export behavior before relying on it during a recovery session. The Tauri
      package routes PDF, JSON, CSV, TXT, encrypted seed, and QR PNG exports
      through an injected WebView bridge and native save_export command that
      opens a native save dialog before writing the selected file.

  14. When the recovery session is complete, click Clear All to wipe all fields
      and in-memory state. Close the browser tab. If the OS is ephemeral, power
      off the machine to complete RAM clearance.


Procedure 2 ? Recovery from .arc Encrypted Seed File (HTML)
-------------------------------------------------------------

Use this procedure when the mnemonic is stored in a .arc backup file and is
not available as a written phrase, or when importing a .arc backup to verify
its integrity.

  1. Complete the airgap and OS prerequisites as specified.

  2. Transfer the .arc file to the airgapped machine via USB drive. Do not
     connect the machine to any network for this transfer.

  3. Open Arculus_Recovery.html in the browser.

  4. Click Import Seed. In the file picker, select the .arc file from the USB
     drive. The tool reads the file, detects its format version, and prompts
     for the decryption password.

  5. Enter the .arc decryption password. This is the password chosen at export
     time. It is not the BIP39 passphrase. Click Decrypt. The tool performs
     MAC verification followed by decryption. If MAC verification fails, the
     file has been tampered with or the password is wrong. The tool does not
     distinguish between these two failure modes in the error message; both
     produce an authentication failure.

  6. If decryption succeeds, the mnemonic is loaded into the hidden-seed
     workflow. The word grid is populated with obfuscated placeholder bullets.
     The root fingerprint display updates immediately. The mnemonic is held
     in protected memory and is not displayed unless Show Seed is pressed and
     held.

  7. Verify the root fingerprint against a previously recorded value. If the
     fingerprint matches, the .arc file contains the correct mnemonic and the
     password was entered correctly. If the fingerprint does not match a recorded
     value, do not proceed until the discrepancy is resolved.

  8. Continue from step 5 of Procedure 1 (passphrase entry, coin selection,
     derivation, and output verification). The derivation pipeline is identical
     regardless of whether the mnemonic was entered directly or imported from
     a .arc file.

  9. The Show Seed button is available if visual confirmation of the full
     mnemonic is needed. Press and hold to reveal the mnemonic temporarily.
     Release to re-obscure. Minimize the duration for which the mnemonic is
     visible.

  10. Complete the session per steps 13 and 14 of Procedure 1.


Procedure 3 ? Recovery via Python CLI
---------------------------------------

Use this procedure when the HTML browser interface is not available or when
scripted derivation of a large address range is required.

  1. Copy Arculus_Recovery.py and the src/ directory to a RAM-backed tmpfs
     location on the airgapped machine before execution. Verify with the mount
     command that the target directory is tmpfs-backed. For GUI recovery, copy
     the full project folder, including Arculus_Recovery.html, src/,
     pyproject.toml, requirements.txt, and packaged assets. The current HTML
     file embeds jsPDF inline and does not require vendor/ at runtime.

  2. For direct mnemonic entry, invoke the CLI with the mnemonic, passphrase,
     coin, derivation path, script type, and address count as required:

     python Arculus_Recovery.py \
       --mnemonic "word1 word2 ... word12" \
       --passphrase "optional passphrase" \
       --derivation "m/84'/0'/0'" \
       --script-type p2wpkh \
       --coin bitcoin \
       --count 10 \
       --output-format json

  3. To derive all common paths for a coin in a single invocation when the
     originating wallet is unknown:

     python Arculus_Recovery.py \
       --mnemonic "word1 word2 ... word12" \
       --coin bitcoin \
       --all-common \
       --count 5 \
       --output-format txt

     The --all-common flag derives m/44', m/49', m/84', and m/86' purpose paths
     for UTXO coins, and m/44' only for Ethereum and XRP.

  4. Redirect output to a file on the tmpfs volume:

     python Arculus_Recovery.py ... > /tmp/recovery_output.json

     Do not write output to a persistent volume. The /tmp directory on a live
     Linux environment is tmpfs-backed and writes to RAM only.

  5. Verify the root_fingerprint field in the JSON output against a previously
     recorded value before relying on any derived address or key.

  6. Transfer the output file to a USB drive for handling on a separate trusted
     machine per Category B requirements in OpSec.txt.

  7. On session completion, remove the output file from /tmp and power off
     the machine. RAM is cleared at power loss on an ephemeral OS.


Address Location Procedure
---------------------------

Use this procedure when the originating wallet software, derivation path,
script type, or passphrase usage is unknown. The goal is to systematically
locate the derivation configuration that produces addresses matching known
on-chain history. This procedure requires a reference address: at least one
address that is known to have been funded from the wallet being recovered.

If no reference address is available, the procedure below cannot definitively
confirm a match. In that case, derive all standard paths and inspect each for
plausible on-chain history after the airgapped session ends, on a separate
trusted networked device.

  Step 1 ? Determine passphrase usage:

    Derive with an empty passphrase on the most likely path for the coin and
    script type (see reference table). Compare the derived addresses against
    the reference address. If the reference address appears, the wallet used
    no passphrase. Proceed to step 2.

    If the reference address does not appear with an empty passphrase, the
    wallet likely used a passphrase. Try each known or candidate passphrase
    in turn, repeating the derivation. If none produce the reference address,
    the passphrase is unknown and the funds may be inaccessible by this path.
    Record the root fingerprint for each passphrase attempt for future reference.

  Step 2 ? Identify the derivation path and script type:

    For Bitcoin, try the paths below in order. For each, derive at least 10
    receiving branch (branch index 0) addresses and compare against the
    reference address. The address prefix is a fast filter: if the reference
    address starts with bc1p, test only m/86' paths; if it starts with bc1q,
    test only m/84' and m/0' paths; if it starts with 1, test only m/44' paths;
    if it starts with 3, test only m/49' paths.

      1. m/84'/0'/0'  (P2WPKH, most common for modern Bitcoin wallets)
      2. m/0'         (P2WPKH, Arculus native default)
      3. m/44'/0'/0'  (P2PKH, legacy BIP44)
      4. m/49'/0'/0'  (P2WPKH-P2SH, wrapped SegWit)
      5. m/86'/0'/0'  (P2TR, Taproot)

    For Litecoin, try in order: m/84'/2'/0', m/44'/2'/0', m/49'/2'/0',
    m/86'/2'/0'.

    For Dogecoin, try in order: m/44'/3'/0', m/49'/3'/0', m/84'/3'/0'.

    For Ethereum and XRP, the path is fixed (m/44'/60'/0' and m/44'/144'/0'
    respectively). Only the passphrase can vary.

    Use --all-common in the CLI to derive all four Bitcoin purpose paths in one
    invocation and inspect the combined output.

  Step 3 ? Extend the address window if needed:

    If none of the receiving branch addresses at indices 0?9 match the reference
    address, increase the address count to 25, then 50, then 100. A wallet that
    has been in use for a long time or that uses a gap-aware derivation policy
    may have funded addresses at high indices. The derivation is fast; a count
    of 100 adds negligible time.

    Also check the change branch (branch index 1) if the reference address is
    a change output. Change addresses are commonly funded in UTXO wallets and
    are on branch index 1 rather than branch index 0.

  Step 4 ? Check non-standard account indices:

    If account index 0 does not produce the reference address, try account
    index 1 and 2 (e.g. m/84'/0'/1', m/84'/0'/2'). Some wallet software
    creates multiple accounts and the wallet in question may have used a
    non-default account.

  Step 5 ? Record findings:

    Once the correct path, script type, and passphrase are confirmed, record:
      - The root fingerprint for this mnemonic and passphrase combination
      - The derivation path
      - The script type
      - Whether a passphrase was used (but not the passphrase value itself,
        unless it is stored in a separately secured location)

    These four values are sufficient to reproduce the derivation configuration
    in future sessions without repeating the discovery procedure.


Sweeping Funds After Hardware Wallet Failure
---------------------------------------------

Use this procedure when a hardware wallet has failed, been lost, or been
destroyed and funds must be moved to a new wallet. This procedure assumes the
recovery session is complete (Procedure 1, 2, or 3) and the derived addresses
and private keys have been exported to a file on an encrypted USB drive.

This procedure involves importing private key material into a software wallet
on a networked device. That device should be considered exposed to the private
keys after this operation is complete. The hardware wallet and its mnemonic
should be treated as compromised from the moment the private keys are imported
into any networked software.

  1. On the airgapped machine, complete the derivation and export the relevant
     private keys in JSON or CSV format to an encrypted USB drive.

  2. On a trusted, clean, networked device, open the software wallet of your
     choice (Electrum for Bitcoin, MetaMask for Ethereum, etc.) in sweep or
     watch-only mode.

  3. Import the private key for each address that holds funds. Most software
     wallets accept WIF (for UTXO coins) or hex private keys (for Ethereum)
     for individual address sweeps. Do not import the extended private key into
     a networked wallet; prefer per-address WIF imports to minimize exposure.

  4. Construct a transaction from each funded address to an address in the new
     hardware wallet. Broadcast all sweep transactions before considering the
     old wallet retired.

  5. Verify on-chain that each sweep transaction has confirmed before the next
     step. Do not retire the old wallet backup until all funds have moved and
     confirmed.

  6. After all funds have swept and confirmed, the old mnemonic and its .arc
     backup are no longer needed for fund access. They should be retained as
     historical records of the old wallet or destroyed per your operational
     policy for retired key material. A mnemonic that has been imported into
     any networked device should be considered permanently exposed.

  7. Generate a new mnemonic for the replacement hardware wallet using the
     hardware wallet's own CSPRNG. Do not reuse the recovered mnemonic as a
     new wallet seed. Do not use Arculus Recovery to generate the replacement
     hardware wallet seed; use the hardware wallet's own generation mechanism.

  8. Back up the new mnemonic and set up a new .arc file on the airgapped
     machine following the backup verification procedure in OpSec.txt.


Recovery Verification Checklist
---------------------------------

Before ending any recovery session and acting on derived output, confirm all
of the following. Each unchecked item is a potential source of irreversible error.

  [ ] The BIP39 checksum passed during mnemonic validation.

  [ ] The root fingerprint matches a previously recorded value, OR this is
      the first session for this mnemonic and the fingerprint has been recorded
      for future reference.

  [ ] At least one derived address has been confirmed to match known on-chain
      history, either against a recorded address list or against a prior export.

  [ ] The passphrase field contained the correct value (including empty if no
      passphrase was used). A single character difference produces a completely
      different key tree.

  [ ] The derivation path and script type match the originating wallet.

  [ ] The export file has been saved to an encrypted USB drive and has not been
      written to any persistent or networked filesystem on the airgapped machine.

  [ ] Clear All has been clicked or the session will be ended by powering off
      the machine. In-memory seed state is not cleared by navigating away from
      the tab or minimizing the window; it persists until Clear All is used or
      the tab is closed.

  [ ] The USB drive containing the export file is physically secured and will
      be handled under Category B controls as defined in OpSec.txt.


Common Recovery Failures and Resolutions
-----------------------------------------

The following failures account for the majority of unsuccessful recovery
attempts. Each is listed with its diagnostic indicator and corrective action.

Failure: No derived addresses match on-chain history.
  Indicator: All derived addresses are unfamiliar. Root fingerprint does not
    match any recorded value.
  Most likely cause: Wrong passphrase, wrong mnemonic word, or wrong derivation
    path. These three causes are indistinguishable by inspection of the output.
  Resolution: Verify the BIP39 checksum passes. Try the empty passphrase if
    passphrase usage is uncertain. Try each standard derivation path using the
    address location procedure above. If the mnemonic was hand-transcribed,
    check each word against the BIP39 word list for plausible transcription
    errors.

Failure: BIP39 checksum fails.
  Indicator: The tool displays a checksum validation error.
  Most likely cause: One or more mnemonic words are misspelled, in wrong order,
    or from the wrong word list. The BIP39 English word list is the only
    supported word list.
  Resolution: Review each word against the BIP39 word list. The 2048-word list
    is published in the BIP39 specification. Common errors include: visually
    similar words (witch/which, right/light), words differing by one letter
    (able/able), and words from non-English BIP39 word lists.

Failure: .arc import fails with authentication error.
  Indicator: The tool displays an authentication or MAC verification failure
    after password entry.
  Most likely cause: Wrong password, or the file was modified after export.
    Both causes produce identical error messages.
  Resolution: Re-enter the password carefully. If the password contains Unicode
    characters, confirm they are entered in the same normalized form used at
    export time. If the correct password is known with certainty and verification
    still fails, the file has been corrupted or tampered with and cannot be
    decrypted. Recover from an alternative backup.

Failure: .arc import fails with format error before password prompt.
  Indicator: The tool rejects the file immediately without prompting for a
    password.
  Most likely cause: The file is corrupted, truncated, or is not a .arc file.
  Resolution: Verify the file is a valid UTF-8 text file beginning with
    "ARCULUS-ARC-V2". Confirm the file transfer was complete and the USB drive
    is readable. Try a second copy of the file from a separate USB drive if one
    exists.

Failure: Derived output matches the mnemonic but not the expected addresses.
  Indicator: Root fingerprint matches a recorded value, but the specific
    addresses in the output are unfamiliar.
  Most likely cause: Wrong derivation path, wrong script type, wrong account
    index, or wrong address count (the target address is beyond the derived
    window).
  Resolution: Try each standard derivation path. Increase the address count.
    Check the change branch (branch index 1). Try account indices 1 and 2.

Failure: Passphrase-derived addresses are correct but passphrase is forgotten.
  Indicator: Derivation with the empty passphrase produces addresses with no
    on-chain history. The passphrase-derived root fingerprint (recorded
    previously) does not match the empty-passphrase fingerprint.
  Resolution: There is no recovery path for a forgotten BIP39 passphrase from
    the mnemonic alone. The passphrase is not stored in the .arc file; the .arc
    file stores the mnemonic only. If the passphrase was written down separately,
    locate that record. If no backup of the passphrase exists, the funds in the
    passphrase-derived key tree are inaccessible.

