Arculus Recovery v1.5.0 — BIP39 Passphrase Reference
======================================================

Scope
-----

This document defines the BIP39 passphrase as implemented in Arculus Recovery
v1.5.0: its cryptographic role in seed derivation, how it interacts with the
mnemonic, the precise consequences of every class of passphrase error, the
distinction between the passphrase and the .arc encryption password, backup
requirements, the visibility toggle introduced in v1.4.0, and the operational
procedures for entering, verifying, and storing the passphrase correctly.

The BIP39 passphrase is the single most operationally dangerous input in the
entire recovery workflow. A mnemonic entered with a wrong character produces a
BIP39 checksum failure on most errors; a passphrase entered wrong produces no
error of any kind and no warning. It silently derives a completely valid-looking
key tree that has no connection to any funded wallet. This document exists
because the gap between "no error was produced" and "the output is correct" is
nowhere larger than it is for the passphrase.

This document is specific to the BIP39 passphrase. The .arc encryption password
is a different secret, defined in Encryption.txt. The derivation pipeline that
consumes the passphrase is defined in Derivation.txt. Operational security
requirements for any session that handles the passphrase are defined in OpSec.txt.


What the BIP39 Passphrase Is
-----------------------------

The BIP39 passphrase is an optional string that participates in seed derivation
as a second factor. It was specified in BIP39 and is sometimes called the "25th
word" by hardware wallet documentation, though it is not constrained to the BIP39
word list and is not a word in any technical sense. It may be any Unicode string
of any length, including the empty string.

Its position in the derivation pipeline is defined precisely:

  password_bytes = NFKD(mnemonic).encode("utf-8")
  salt_bytes     = ("mnemonic" + NFKD(passphrase)).encode("utf-8")

  seed = PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA512(
      password   = password_bytes,
      salt       = salt_bytes,
      iterations = 2048,
      dklen      = 64
  )

The passphrase is concatenated onto the string "mnemonic" and used as the PBKDF2
salt, not as the PBKDF2 password. The mnemonic is the PBKDF2 password. This
parameter assignment follows the BIP39 specification exactly. The reversal from
intuitive expectations — passphrase-as-salt rather than passphrase-as-password —
is a deliberate design in BIP39 and has no practical security consequence; PBKDF2
derives key material from both parameters under a construction that treats neither
as more privileged than the other.

The output of this PBKDF2 invocation is a 512-bit (64-byte) seed. Every bit of
every key derived from the seed — including every address, every private key, and
every extended key at every depth — is a deterministic function of both the
mnemonic and the passphrase together. Neither alone is sufficient to reconstruct
the seed.


What the BIP39 Passphrase Is Not
----------------------------------

The BIP39 passphrase is not any of the following:

  It is not the .arc encryption password. The .arc file stores and protects
  only the mnemonic. It does not store the passphrase. Decrypting a .arc file
  recovers the mnemonic; re-entering the passphrase separately during derivation
  is still required. See the section on password independence below.

  It is not a PIN or login credential for any software. It does not protect
  access to the tool itself. No part of Arculus Recovery uses it for
  authentication.

  It is not optional in the sense of "safe to omit at recovery time if you used
  one at setup time." If a passphrase was used when the wallet was created, it is
  required for recovery. Omitting it at recovery time does not produce an error;
  it derives the empty-passphrase key tree, which is a completely different wallet
  with a different root fingerprint, different addresses, and different private
  keys. Funds in the passphrase-derived tree are not accessible from the empty-
  passphrase tree and vice versa.

  It is not recoverable from the mnemonic. There is no mathematical relationship
  between the mnemonic and the passphrase. Given the mnemonic and a set of funded
  addresses, there is no faster path to finding the passphrase than trying every
  candidate value. If the passphrase is forgotten and no backup exists, the funds
  in the passphrase-derived tree are permanently inaccessible by any means,
  including by the authors of this software.

  It is not validated by the BIP39 checksum. The BIP39 checksum covers the
  mnemonic entropy bits only. It has no knowledge of the passphrase. A wrong
  passphrase produces no checksum error, no validation warning, and no
  computationally detectable signal of any kind other than a root fingerprint
  mismatch against a previously recorded value.


Cryptographic Effect of the Passphrase
----------------------------------------

Every distinct passphrase string — including the empty string — produces a
completely independent 512-bit seed from the same mnemonic. The seeds are
unrelated: knowing the mnemonic and the seed derived from passphrase A gives no
computational advantage in finding the seed derived from passphrase B, regardless
of any relationship between A and B.

This independence is a consequence of PBKDF2's pseudorandom function properties.
PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA512 is a keyed pseudorandom function family. Changing a single
byte of the salt — which includes the passphrase — produces an output that is
computationally indistinguishable from a random 64-byte string by any adversary
who does not know the salt value. Two passphrases that differ by a single
character produce seeds that share no bits in a predictable pattern.

Practical consequences:

  "password" and "Password" derive completely different wallets. The passphrase
  is case-sensitive. There is no case folding or normalization applied beyond
  Unicode NFKD decomposition (described below). A capital letter in the wrong
  position is not a similar passphrase; it is a different passphrase.

  "password " (with a trailing space) and "password" (without) derive completely
  different wallets. The passphrase is whitespace-sensitive. Leading and trailing
  spaces are not stripped. No normalization of any kind is applied to whitespace.

  "café" entered on a keyboard that produces the precomposed U+00E9 (é as a
  single code point) and "café" entered on a keyboard that produces the
  decomposed U+0065 U+0301 (e followed by combining acute accent) derive the
  same wallet. Unicode NFKD decomposition is applied to the passphrase before
  byte-encoding, as specified by BIP39. Visually identical strings that differ
  only in Unicode composition form are normalized to the same byte sequence.
  This is the only normalization applied.

  No other normalization is performed. The passphrase is not lowercased, trimmed,
  or otherwise transformed. What is typed is what is used, after NFKD
  decomposition.


Unicode NFKD Normalization
---------------------------

BIP39 mandates Unicode NFKD (Normalization Form Compatibility Decomposition)
for both the mnemonic and the passphrase before byte-encoding. The normalization
is applied by normalizeNFKD() in the HTML version and by
unicodedata.normalize('NFKD', ...) in the Python version.

NFKD normalization does two things:

  Canonical decomposition: composed characters are decomposed into their base
  characters and combining characters. U+00E9 (é, precomposed) becomes U+0065
  U+0301 (e + combining acute accent). U+00C5 (Å, precomposed) becomes U+0041
  U+030A (A + combining ring above).

  Compatibility decomposition: compatibility variants are mapped to their
  canonical equivalents. The ligature U+FB01 (ﬁ) becomes U+0066 U+0069 (fi).
  The superscript U+00B2 (²) becomes U+0032 (2). The full-width U+FF41 (ａ)
  becomes U+0061 (a).

For passphrases composed entirely of ASCII characters (letters, digits, spaces,
punctuation in the ASCII range), NFKD normalization is an identity transformation:
all ASCII code points are already in their canonical decomposed form with no
compatibility variants. The NFKD-normalized and non-normalized byte sequences are
identical for any ASCII-only passphrase.

For passphrases that contain non-ASCII Unicode characters, the behavior of NFKD
normalization must be considered carefully:

  Any character with a compatibility equivalent will be silently transformed.
  A passphrase typed on a keyboard that produces full-width characters (common on
  some CJK input methods) will be normalized to their half-width equivalents. A
  passphrase containing ligatures will have them split. If the passphrase was
  created on a system that does not apply NFKD normalization before storage, and
  the original unnormalized byte sequence was what was intended, the BIP39-
  compliant derivation using NFKD normalization will produce a different seed.

  The NFKD normalization requirement is part of the BIP39 specification and is
  applied by all conformant BIP39 implementations. It is not a behavior specific
  to Arculus Recovery. Any hardware wallet that follows BIP39 applies NFKD
  normalization to the passphrase before seed derivation. If the passphrase was
  originally set on a conformant hardware wallet, the same NFKD normalization
  will have been applied at setup time, and re-entering the same passphrase in
  Arculus Recovery will produce the correct seed.

  The operational recommendation is to use ASCII-only passphrases. NFKD
  normalization over ASCII is a no-op, and the passphrase will produce identical
  byte sequences on any conformant platform regardless of Unicode composition
  form or platform-specific normalization settings.


The Empty Passphrase
---------------------

The empty string is a valid BIP39 passphrase. It is the default when no
passphrase is entered. The BIP39 salt in this case is:

  salt_bytes = "mnemonic".encode("utf-8")   -- 8 bytes

A wallet set up without a passphrase derives from this empty-passphrase seed.
Most hardware wallets that support BIP39 passphrases use the empty passphrase by
default and require an explicit opt-in to use a non-empty one.

The empty passphrase and any non-empty passphrase derive completely disjoint
key trees. A wallet that holds funds under the empty-passphrase tree has no
funds accessible from any non-empty passphrase, and vice versa. There is no
"master" wallet that contains both; they are independent derivations.

In the Passphrase field in Arculus Recovery, leaving the field empty and entering
a passphrase that happens to be the empty string are equivalent: both result in
the empty-passphrase derivation. There is no sentinel value, null encoding, or
special handling for the empty case. The field value is used directly as the
passphrase string, and the empty string is a fully valid passphrase value.

When recovering a wallet, the correct starting assumption is that no passphrase
was used unless there is specific knowledge or documentation to the contrary.
Deriving with an empty passphrase first and comparing the root fingerprint against
a recorded value is the fastest path to confirming this assumption.


Independence from the .arc Encryption Password
------------------------------------------------

The BIP39 passphrase and the .arc file encryption password are independent
secrets that operate on unrelated key schedules. They are not derived from each
other. Neither can be inferred from the other. Each must be preserved and
recalled independently.

The .arc file stores the mnemonic under encryption. It does not store the
passphrase. When a .arc file is exported, the passphrase in the Passphrase field
at export time is not recorded anywhere in the file. Decrypting a .arc file
recovers only the mnemonic. The passphrase must be remembered or retrieved from
a separate backup and re-entered manually into the Passphrase field before
derivation is run.

The two passwords differ structurally:

  .arc encryption password:
    Used as input to PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA512 at 1,000,000 iterations to derive the
    encryption and authentication keys for the .arc file. Governs whether the
    .arc file can be decrypted. An incorrect .arc password produces a MAC
    authentication failure and decryption does not proceed.

  BIP39 passphrase:
    Used as input to PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA512 at 2,048 iterations as the salt
    component of BIP39 seed derivation. Governs which key tree is derived from
    the mnemonic. An incorrect BIP39 passphrase produces no error; it derives a
    different valid-looking key tree silently.

The error behavior is inverted: a wrong .arc password is detected immediately
and visibly; a wrong BIP39 passphrase is undetectable without a reference
fingerprint or known address to compare against. This asymmetry makes the BIP39
passphrase operationally more hazardous than the .arc encryption password.

The two passwords may be set to the same string value by user choice. This does
not cause any cryptographic conflict; the engine applies them on entirely separate
key schedules with different parameters and different input contexts. Reusing the
same string for both is a user decision; the tool does not prevent it, warn about
it, or encourage it. The operational consequence of reusing them is that
compromise of one compromises the other.


Root Fingerprint as Passphrase Verification
---------------------------------------------

The root fingerprint is the only reliable mechanism for verifying that the
correct passphrase has been entered during a recovery session. It is defined as:

  root_pubkey      = serP(master_private_key × G)   -- 33-byte compressed
  root_fingerprint = HASH160(root_pubkey)[0:4]       -- 4-byte hex string

The fingerprint is derived deterministically from the mnemonic and passphrase
together. Two sessions using the same mnemonic and passphrase always produce the
same fingerprint. Two sessions using the same mnemonic but different passphrases
produce different fingerprints with overwhelming probability.

The root fingerprint is displayed in the Arculus Recovery toolbar and is updated
immediately and asynchronously after every change to the mnemonic state or after
derivation completes. It is also included in every JSON and TXT export and in the
PDF title block.

To use the root fingerprint as a passphrase verification mechanism:

  At wallet setup or first recovery: record the root fingerprint immediately
  after validating the mnemonic and entering the passphrase. The fingerprint is
  not secret; it reveals no recoverable key material. It may be stored alongside
  the mnemonic backup, alongside the .arc file, or in any accessible location.
  Its sole purpose is to confirm that a given mnemonic and passphrase combination
  reproduce the expected key tree.

  At recovery: after entering the mnemonic and passphrase, compare the displayed
  root fingerprint against the recorded value before exporting any derived output
  or acting on any derived address. A fingerprint mismatch is the only signal
  that a wrong passphrase was entered. In the absence of a recorded fingerprint,
  comparison against a known funded address from the wallet's on-chain history
  is the fallback verification mechanism.

The root fingerprint is a 4-byte (8 hex character) value. Fingerprint collisions
— two different (mnemonic, passphrase) pairs producing the same fingerprint — are
possible with probability approximately 1/2^32 per pair. For any practical
recovery scenario, a fingerprint match constitutes reliable confirmation.


Passphrase Entry in the HTML Interface
----------------------------------------

The Passphrase field in Arculus Recovery v1.5.0 is a password-type input that
masks its contents by default. This behavior was introduced in v1.4.0 to prevent
shoulder-surfing exposure of the passphrase during session setup.

Visibility toggle:

  An eye-icon button is embedded in the right edge of the Passphrase field. It
  toggles the field between masked (type="password", contents displayed as
  bullets) and plain-text (type="text", contents visible) display.

  Masked state:   button aria-label is "Show passphrase"
  Plain-text state: button aria-label is "Hide passphrase"

  The toggle state is not persisted between sessions. The field always begins in
  the masked state when the page loads or when Clear All is used.

  Use the plain-text state only to verify that the passphrase was entered
  correctly, and return to masked state before any period in which the screen
  may be visible to others. Minimize the duration for which the passphrase is
  displayed in plain text.

Behavioral notes:

  The Passphrase field does not apply any normalization to its displayed value.
  The NFKD normalization described above is applied to the string at the point
  it is consumed by the derivation pipeline (mnemonicToSeed and related
  functions), not at the point of entry. The field displays the raw typed string.

  The Passphrase field is cleared by Clear All. It is not cleared by switching
  the coin or derivation path. It persists in the field until explicitly cleared
  or until the page is closed.

  The Passphrase field does not participate in the hidden-seed workflow. It is
  always readable in the DOM when in plain-text toggle state. On a machine where
  screen capture or DOM inspection is possible, the passphrase is readable in
  plain text if the visibility toggle is enabled.

  The inactivity auto-clear timer (5-minute idle timeout, introduced in
  v1.4.0) clears the Passphrase field as part of its full-session wipe. This
  provides an automatic recovery from a session that was left unattended.


Common Passphrase Errors and Their Consequences
-------------------------------------------------

The following errors are silent in all cases. They produce no error message, no
warning, and no computationally detectable signal other than a root fingerprint
mismatch or failure to locate known addresses.

Error: Entering a passphrase when none was used at wallet setup.
  Consequence: The derived key tree is completely different from the wallet that
    holds funds. All derived addresses and private keys are for an empty wallet.
    The tool produces no error. The root fingerprint will differ from any
    previously recorded value.
  Detection: Root fingerprint mismatch, or failure to locate any known funded
    address in the derived output.
  Resolution: Clear the Passphrase field and re-derive. Compare the root
    fingerprint against the recorded value.

Error: Omitting the passphrase when one was used at wallet setup.
  Consequence: Identical to the above. The empty-passphrase derivation produces
    a completely different key tree. The tool produces no error.
  Detection: Root fingerprint mismatch, or failure to locate any known funded
    address in the derived output.
  Resolution: Re-enter the passphrase and re-derive. If the passphrase is unknown,
    refer to the passphrase recovery procedure in Recovery.txt.

Error: Case error in a passphrase composed of mixed-case letters.
  Consequence: A single character in the wrong case produces a completely
    different 512-bit seed. All downstream key material is unrelated to the
    wallet that holds funds. No error is produced.
  Detection: Root fingerprint mismatch.
  Resolution: Systematically try each candidate capitalization. If the passphrase
    is short and the location of the error is suspected, the search space may be
    manageable. For a long passphrase where the error location is unknown, the
    search space grows exponentially with passphrase length.

Error: Extra or missing whitespace in the passphrase.
  Consequence: A trailing space, leading space, or doubled space produces a
    completely different seed. Whitespace is not normalized. No error is produced.
  Detection: Root fingerprint mismatch.
  Resolution: Try the passphrase with and without leading/trailing whitespace.
    If the passphrase was copied from a source that may have added whitespace,
    check the source carefully.

Error: Passphrase entered with a different keyboard layout than at setup time.
  Consequence: Characters that map to different code points on different keyboard
    layouts produce different byte sequences. A passphrase containing characters
    outside the invariant ASCII set (i.e., characters other than A-Z, a-z, 0-9,
    and common punctuation) may silently produce different byte sequences on
    different keyboards, regardless of visible appearance.
  Detection: Root fingerprint mismatch.
  Resolution: Identify the keyboard layout used at setup time. If the setup
    machine is still available, re-enter the passphrase on it and record the
    root fingerprint. Use ASCII-only passphrases for all future wallets to
    eliminate keyboard layout dependency.

Error: Passphrase forgotten entirely.
  Consequence: Permanent loss of access to all funds in the passphrase-derived
    key tree. There is no recovery path from a forgotten passphrase. The
    passphrase is not stored in the .arc file, is not derivable from the
    mnemonic, and cannot be reconstructed from the derived addresses or keys.
  Detection: The passphrase is not known. Root fingerprint cannot be matched.
  Resolution: None available through the tool. If the passphrase was a short,
    low-entropy string and a partial description of it is remembered, a manual
    search may be feasible. If the passphrase was a long, random, high-entropy
    string and no backup exists, the funds are permanently inaccessible.


Passphrase Backup Requirements
--------------------------------

The passphrase must be backed up independently of the mnemonic. A mnemonic backup
without the passphrase recovers only the empty-passphrase key tree. If all funded
addresses are in a passphrase-derived tree, a mnemonic-only backup provides no
access to funds.

The following backup architecture is the minimum acceptable for a wallet that
uses a passphrase:

  Backup 1 — Mnemonic (primary seed backup):
    The mnemonic, recorded in permanent ink on archival paper or engraved on
    metal. Stored in a fire-resistant container at a separate physical location
    from the hardware wallet. This backup provides access to the empty-passphrase
    key tree only. It does not provide access to funded addresses in the
    passphrase-derived tree without the passphrase.

  Backup 2 — Passphrase (separate from mnemonic):
    The passphrase recorded in the same physical form as the mnemonic backup, but
    stored at a different physical location from both the mnemonic backup and the
    hardware wallet. No single physical location should hold both the mnemonic
    and the passphrase. An adversary who obtains both can reconstruct the wallet
    without any other material.

  Backup 3 — Root fingerprint (stored alongside both backups):
    The root fingerprint for the mnemonic and passphrase combination. The
    fingerprint is not secret; it cannot be used to reconstruct any key material.
    It serves as a verification checksum to confirm that the mnemonic and
    passphrase have been correctly recorded and recalled. Store it in both backup
    locations: alongside the mnemonic backup and alongside the passphrase backup.

  Backup 4 — .arc file (optional, encrypted digital backup of mnemonic):
    A .arc file stores and protects the mnemonic only. If a .arc backup is used,
    the passphrase backup (Backup 2) remains independently required. Recovering
    from the .arc file and omitting the passphrase at derivation time recovers
    only the empty-passphrase tree.

The passphrase backup must be verified at creation time using the same round-trip
procedure defined for .arc files in OpSec.txt: enter the mnemonic and the
passphrase, confirm the root fingerprint matches the recorded value, and confirm
at least one known address appears in the derivation output. A passphrase backup
that has not been verified by this procedure may contain a transcription error
that renders it useless at recovery time.

The passphrase backup should be verified periodically (annually at minimum)
using the same procedure, for the same reason that .arc files are re-verified:
to confirm the backup is readable and the passphrase is still correctly recalled.
A passphrase that was correct five years ago and has since been partially
misremembered is indistinguishable from a wrong passphrase at recovery time.


Entropy Considerations for Passphrase Choice
---------------------------------------------

The BIP39 passphrase provides two security properties that are often conflated:

  Property 1 — Wallet segregation (plausible deniability):
    A single mnemonic can be used with multiple passphrases to create independent
    wallets. An adversary who obtains the mnemonic under coercion has no way to
    determine how many passphrases exist or which one controls the primary funds.
    A small amount of funds can be kept in the empty-passphrase wallet as a
    decoy; the primary funds are in a passphrase-derived wallet unknown to the
    adversary.

    For this use case, the passphrase does not need to be high-entropy. It needs
    to be unknown to the adversary and unknown from the mnemonic alone. Even a
    short passphrase that is not publicly known provides effective deniability,
    because the adversary cannot distinguish an empty wallet from a wallet that
    simply has no funds yet.

  Property 2 — Cryptographic hardening against mnemonic compromise:
    If the mnemonic is obtained by an adversary — through theft of the paper
    backup, hardware wallet compromise, or other means — the passphrase prevents
    the adversary from accessing funds in the passphrase-derived tree until the
    passphrase is also obtained. The strength of this protection is a direct
    function of passphrase entropy.

    For this use case, the passphrase must be high-entropy. An adversary who
    obtains the mnemonic can attempt to brute-force the passphrase offline, with
    no rate limiting and no detection mechanism, because PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA512 at
    only 2,048 iterations — the BIP39 KDF parameter — provides negligible
    resistance to GPU-accelerated guessing. A short, low-entropy passphrase
    (a single word, a name, a date, a common phrase) provides no meaningful
    protection against a dedicated adversary.

    The entropy threshold for effective hardening against offline brute-force is
    substantially higher than what BIP39's 2,048-iteration KDF protects. A
    passphrase of five or more randomly selected words from a large wordlist, or
    a randomly generated alphanumeric string of 16 or more characters, provides
    a search space large enough to make exhaustive attack infeasible regardless
    of GPU availability.

The two use cases have conflicting backup risk profiles. A high-entropy passphrase
that is difficult to brute-force is also more difficult to remember and more
likely to be forgotten or transcribed incorrectly. A short, memorable passphrase
that is easy to recall provides deniability but limited brute-force resistance.
The choice between these trade-offs is a user decision that depends on the threat
model. This document does not prescribe a specific choice; it documents the
consequences of each approach so the decision can be made with full information.

In both cases, the backup requirement is identical: the passphrase must be
recorded in a durable, physically secured backup that is stored separately from
the mnemonic, and the backup must be verified against a known root fingerprint
before it is relied upon for recovery.
